What Happens When You Type https://www.google.com in Your Browser and Press Enter



           Ever wondered what's happening behind the scenes when you type a URL let's say https://www.google.com into your web browser and hit enter? There are lots of processes that take place within that little time frame to bring out the web pages you want. Let me explain:



1- DNS Request

 The journey begins by translating our human-readable domain name (https://www.google.com) into an IP address that the computer can understand. This whole process is done by a DNS lookup, which searches its cache system and, if needed, ISP, other systems until it finds the IP address. Think of it as a giant phonebook for the internet.



2- TCP/IP 

With the IP address found, a secure connection is established between your device and the server using TCP/IP protocols. TCP ensures a safe, reliable transfer of data packets, while IP provides the routes for transmission.



3- Firewall

 Acting as a gatekeeper, firewalls monitor and guide incoming and outgoing traffic based on predefined (security) rules, protecting devices and servers from unauthorised access or attacks.



4- HTTPS/SSL

 The 'https' in the URL ensures the use of HTTPS, which encrypts the information transmitted, making it safe and tamper-proof through SSL.



5- Load Balancer

 Large companies like Google use load balancers to distribute incoming traffic among multiple web servers, ensuring efficiency and preventing server overload.



6- Web Servers

 Web servers receive and process requests, retrieving necessary elements (HTML, CSS, JavaScript) to generate a response.



7- Application Server

 For dynamic content, application servers execute necessary logic, interact with databases, and prepare responses, acting as intermediaries between web servers and databases.



8- Database

 Websites rely on databases to store and manage information. If the request involves stored data, the application server queries the database, retrieves the data, and sends it back to populate the website dynamically.



9- Response Sending

 The application server sends the processed data back to the web server, which assembles everything into a complete webpage and sends it to your browser.



10- Rendering the Web Page

 Your browser then brings the webpage to life by rendering it, interpreting elements like HTML, CSS, and JavaScript to display the final visuals on your screen.



In conclusion, typing a simple URL like google.com into our browsers triggers a lot of actions unknown to ordinary users. This process includes the DNS request, TCP/IP connection, firewall checks, load balancing, web and application servers, and sometimes database interactions. And that's how web pages come to life, all happening in seconds.



 I hope I did an awesome job sharing what I learned about how these processes work. Check out more resources to learn more about these if interested.



Thanks greatly!



#dohardthings #lifeatalx #dns #webrendering #alxproject
